Car Accident Severity Analysis
David Gogichaishvili
October 2020
Introduction
Every year, more than 1200 Australians lose their lives on the roads. This not only creates enormous
pain and suffering for the families who lose loved ones to these accidents, but echoes of these losses
account for much grief and suffering in the wider community. Furthermore, these deaths have a
significant impact on both the local and national economy, due to not only the lost productivity of the
lives cut short by fatal motor vehicle accidents, but also due to injuries, temporary or permanent
disabilities and the emotional trauma experienced by both the individuals involved in the accidents and
their families and loved ones.
To date, in Australia, there has been a major policy focus on 3 areas:
1. Speeding prevention and speed limit compliance;
2. Drink driving prevention; and
3. Enhanced restrictions on younger drivers (including extended duration of
Probationary periods, lower alcohol restrictions, limits on passengers, etc).
However, other factors such as the weather, lighting conditions and road conditions have not received
the same amount of attention.
By utilizing data science techniques to assess a robust dataset that includes a range of factors, policy
makers can understand what factors correlate with a high accident rate, and a high accident rate resulting
in death, and determine where to direct policy focus. This data may also be used to integrate
recommendations into map and/or weather software, to direct drivers on routes that avoid areas with
known conditions that may lead to accidents if at all possible (e.g. poor lighting, weather, road
conditions, etc). It may also allow better utilization of emergency services resources and minimization
of emergency services response times by allowing emergency services planners to better predict where
their services will be needed in response to car accidents.
Key stakeholders for this project include:




Road safety policy makers;
Mapping and direction planning software developers;
Emergency services response planners; and
Road users.
Currently, the data gathered in Australia does not consider factors like the weather, the road conditions,
or lighting conditions. As such, analogous data from the US will be utilized to help direct Australian
data gathering efforts.
Data
The Seattle SDOT Traffic Management Division, Traffic Records Group has collated data from 2004
to present, which will be used as a basis for initial data modelling in the absence of Australian data.
This data is stored here.It should be noted that this data has been pre-treated to amalgamate fatality data with injury data, and
has scrubbed data where the outcome was unknown. It therefore categorises each element as either
resulting in property damage (1) or physical injury (2) (unlike the statement in the meta data file).
Approximately 5000 elements (out of nearly 2 million) are missing collision type information,
accounting for ~2.5% of the data. However, this is not relevant to the question at hand (how weather,
lighting conditions and intersection types impact the likelihood of a collision and the likelihood of a
collision resulting in an injury). Similarly, the data on driver intoxication is inconsistent, utilizing both
a 1/0 and Y/N format; and some location data is also missing; but again, these are not one of the
independent or dependent variables in this analysis and will not be utilized in the project.
Feature Selection
The accident severity code (SEVERITYCODE), road conditions (ROADCOND), weather conditions
(WEATHER), and lighting conditions (LIGHTCOND) will be the main focus of this analysis.
Therefore, elements where these codes are not defined (ie "other"), unknown or blank has been scrubbed
for that portion of the analysis. Removing this data resulted in the loss of 24716 out of 194673 elements,
or approximately 12.7% of the data. This is viewed as preferable to the distortion of results due to
missing data.
Further analysis will be performed on data where crashes with obvious causes of driver error (ie
speeding (SPEEDING), intoxication (UNDERINFL) and inattention (INATTENTIONIND)) are
eliminated; given that one of the intents of this study is to assess the potential for a predictive algorithm
for crashes, these factors will not be known when predicting when a crash is likely, and so crashes
where these are a factor should not contribute to the dataset for any predictive algorithm.
It should be noted that this data is not without its concerns. As the SPEEDING data is indicated as a
binary (Y/N), rather than providing (where available) the magnitude of the speeding, this may limit the
accuracy of the MLA, since the risk profile associated with driving 1-2 km/h over the speed limit is
significantly different to driving 20-30km/h over the limit. Furthermore, some of the parameters rely
on subjective information. Whilst weather reports can be utilized to establish the WEATHER
parameter, the road condition and lighting condition will be subjective to the person who made the
report. For example, there is no clear distinction where dusk ends and night begins; what seems like a
wet road in winter to one person may seem like an icy road to another; both a road with a small puddle
and a flooded road may be characterised as having standing water, etc.
It should also be noted that this dataset is not a balanced dataset. There is no indication on the average
distribution of weather (per driver hour) which would allow the impact of weather on the overall
likelihood of a crash to be ascertained, and the sample size for each weather condition, lighting
condition and road condition varies between tens of thousands (for clear weather) and less than 5 (for
smoke/smog).
Despite these concerns with the variable sample sizes, and the limits around the subjectivity and quality
of the data, it is still worthwhile pursuing an investigation to determine the potential accuracy of an
MLA, as even with the limitations around the data quality, the results will indicate whether it is worth
pursuing additional data utilizing less subjective measures for the same parameters.
Methodology
Jupyter Notebooks using Python have been utilized for this data analysis.Data Cleaning and Processing
After importing the data from the Seattle SDOT, the size of the matrix was checked using the SHAPE
command. The elements where weather, road conditions or lighting were ‘Unknown’, ‘Other’, or
missing were expunged, as were the columns not relevant to the central question used in the analysis to
speed up data processing time (specifically geographical coordinates X and Y, the report numbers, and
information relating to parked cars and crosswalks). The matrix shape was checked as a confirmation
that the required elements and columns had been dropped.
The data was then converted from text values to numerical values to allow for algorithmic analysis
using the following key:
Light Condition
Daylight
Dark – Street Lights On
Dark – No Street Lights
Dusk
Dawn
Dark – Street Lights Off
Dark – Unknown Lighting Encoded Value
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Weather Condition
Clear
Raining
Overcast
Snowing
Fog/Smog/Smoke
Sleet/Hail/Freezing Rain
Blowing Sand/Dirt
Severe Crosswind
Partly Cloudy Encoded Value
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Road Condition
Dry
Wet
Ice
Snow/Slush
Standing Water
Sand/Mud/Dirt
Oil Encoded Value
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
In the columns for speeding, inattention and intoxication, Y and N inputs were replaced with 1 and 0
respectively to allow for numerical processing.
A smaller dataframe with only relevant variables and unique keys was produced from this dataframe.This dataframe was further broken down into separate dataframes for the less severe crashes (severity
1) and more severe crashes (severity 2), with an additional subset dataframe made up of only crashes
that did not involve speeding, intoxication or inattention.
Data Visualisation and Analysis
In order to facilitate analysis of the impact of the parameters in question, the cleaned data was visualised
to get a better understanding of the orders of magnitude. An initial review of the main cleaned dataframe
shows the dataframe was undertaken using histogram plots to visualise the size of each part of the
dataset and the proportions of the data, for both the cleaned dataframe (including data from accidents
involving driver inattention, intoxication and speeding) and the reduced dataframe (excluding data from
accidents involving driver inattention, intoxication and speeding).
Grouping by severity code for the lighting conditions, the weather conditions and the road conditions
and trending the relative proportions of the more severe and less severe accidents (both with and without
data from accidents involving driver inattention, intoxication and speeding) to provide insight into
whether the data supports the idea that certain weather, road or lighting conditions affect the likelihood
of a severe crash.
Machine Learning Algorithm
The datasets were divided randomly into training and testing data, with a train/test split of 20% selected.
Multiple Machine Learning Algorithms (MLAs) were developed and tested for the datasets. K Nearest
Neighbour analysis (KNN analysis), Decision Tree analysis, Support Vector Machine analysis (SVM)
and Logistical regression analysis were created for the dataset using a training subset. Their accuracy
was assessed using a Jaccard score, F1 score and (for logistical regression) log loss score. The false
positive (severity 2 predicted and severity 1 actual) and false negative (severity 1 predicted and severity
2 actual) rate was also checked, as for some purposes, a less accurate model with a lower false negative
rate may be more useful.
The MLA models utilized the logic developed in SKLearn, Pylab and SciPy.
Results
Initial Data Analysis
An initial check of the data showed all elements were unique, and that there were more than twice the
number of lower severity (severity 1) crashes as more severe crashes (severity 2) as shown below in
Figure 1.Figure 1 - Total Severity Data
This data shows that the sample size of the severity 1 (over 114,000) and severity 2 (over 55,000)
crashes is sufficient to warrant further analysis.
Plotting a histogram showing the breakdown of the weather conditions, lighting conditions and road
conditions show that the sample size of some of the identified conditions may not be large enough to
draw conclusions, as shown in Figures 2, 3 and 4.
Figure 2 - Road Condition Breakdown
Figure 3 - Weather Condition BreakdownFigure 4 - Light Condition Breakdown
The overwhelming majority of light condition data classifies elements as either “Daylight”, “Dark –
street lights”, “Dusk” or “Dawn”, representing 55,049 out of 55,683 severity 2 crashes, and 112,378
out of 114,274 severity 1 crashes. The overwhelming majority of weather condition data classifies
elements as “Clear”, “Raining” or “Overcast”, representing 55,284 out of 55,683 severity 2 crashes,
and 113,112 out of 114,274 severity 1 crashes. Similarly, the vast majority of road conditions are
classified as “Dry” or “Wet”, representing 55,191 out of 55,683 severity 2 crashes, and 112,623 out of
114,274 severity 1 crashes.
The analysis of the elements not classified in the above groups should be taken with care, as they
represent a relatively small subset of the data and the elements in other categories of lighting, road
conditions and weather may not be statistically significant.
Of particular concern are the lighting condition of “Dark – Unknown Lighting” (lighting condition 6),
and the weather conditions of “Severe Crosswind” and “Partly Cloudy” (weather conditions 7 and 8),
as the sample size of the severity 1 and severity 2 crashes of each of these condition subsets are less
than 10 elements. Therefore, it is not possible to reliably draw any conclusions around the impact of
these conditions. However, this analysis may provide insight into where additional data gathering may
be useful, and so these categories will not be excluded from the data analysis.
If historical weather data is available, future analysis may be performed to ascertain the degree of
misclassification of weather data (for example, where partly cloudy weather was classified as clear).
Impact of Weather, Lighting Conditions and Road
Conditions
The normalized value count of each weather, road and lighting condition were trended to allow visual
comparison of the proportion of more severe crashes to the severity 1 crashes. These are shown below
in Figures 5, 6 and 7.
Figure 5 – Normalised Weather Crash SplitFigure 5 shows that the highest proportion of severe crashes occurs during partly cloudy conditions
(weather condition 8), and that raining and overcast conditions (conditions 1 and 2 respectively) and
sleet/hail conditions (condition 4) have a higher proportion of severe crashes than clear conditions
(condition 0). It also shows that snowing conditions (weather condition 3) have a lower severe crash
rate.
Figure 6 - Normalised Light Condition Crash Split
Figure 6 shows that daylight conditions (condition 0), have a higher severe crash likelihood than almost
all other conditions other than condition 6 (dark – unknown streetlights), including dark conditions with
streetlights (condition 1), dark conditions without streetlights (condition 2), dusk (condition 3).
Figure 7 - Normalised Road Condition Crash Split
Figure 7 shows that wet conditions (condition 1), oil on the roads (condition 6) and sand/mud (condition
5) have a higher severe crash proportion than dry conditions (condition 0); however, icy conditions
(condition 2), snow/slush (condition 3), and standing water (condition 4) have a lower severe crash
proportion.
Similar figures have also been generated for the reduced dataset that excludes accidents where speeding,
intoxication or distraction may have been a factor, in figures 8, 9 and 10 below.Figure 8 - Normalized Weather Split - No Speeding, Intoxication or Distraction
Figure 9 - Normalized Light Condition Split - No Speeding, Intoxication or Distraction
Figure 10 - Normalized Road Condition Split - No Speeding, Intoxication or Distraction
The proportion of severity 2 and severity 1 crashes when excluding data from crashes where speeding,
intoxication or were very similar to (but not identical to) when the data was included.
Machine Learning Algorithm Assessment – Including
Driver Distraction/Intoxication/Speeding
KNN analysis showed a KNN of 12 gave the highest accuracy, as shown below in Figure 11.Figure 11 - KNN Model Accuracy
Using a KNN with a value of 12 gave the following accuracy when tested on the test data and train data:
Train set Accuracy: 0.6681425366822344
Test set Accuracy: 0.6686867498234879
Jaccard Similarity: 0.6686867498234879
F1 Score: 0.552273798552947
The test data was used to assess false positives and false negatives:
Count where predicted matches actual: 22730
Count where severe predicted, minor actual: 399
Count where minor predicted, severe actual: 10863
Decision tree analysis was also completed, which produced the following accuracy results utilizing the
test dataset:
DecisionTree Accuracy: 0.6725994351612145
f1 score : 0.5443074212271202
jaccard similarity score : 0.6725994351612145
The test data was used to assess false positives and false negatives:
Count where predicted matches actual: 22863
Count where severe predicted, minor actual: 69
Count where minor predicted, severe actual: 11060
SVM analysis was also completed, which produced the following accuracy results utilizing the test
dataset:
F1 Score 0.5774300165482842
Jaccard Similarity Score 0.6082607672393504
The test data was used to assess false positives and false negatives:Count where predicted matches actual: 20676
Count where severe predicted, minor actual: 4473
Count where minor predicted, severe actual: 8843
Logistic Regression analysis was also completed, which produced the following accuracy results
utilizing the test dataset:
Jaccard Similarity: 0.6728936220287126
F1 Score: 0.5413441909886492
Log Loss: 0.6311613116629152
The test data was used to assess false positives and false negatives:
Count where predicted matches actual: 22873
Count where severe predicted, minor actual: 1
Count where minor predicted, severe actual: 11118
In summary, for the full cleaned dataframe:
A similar analysis was performed for the subset dataframe that excluded accidents that involved
speeding, intoxication or driver distraction. The results of the MLA accuracy analysis are summarized
below:
Discussion and evaluation
Impact of Weather, Lighting Conditions and Road
Conditions
Snowy weather (weather code 3) and icy and roads (road code 3 and 4) had the smallest proportion of
severe crashes. Given the obstructed visibility and slippery roads that occur during snowy weather, this
is what counterintuitive. With over 700 crashes represented in this dataset, it is not appropriate to write
this off as statistically insignificant, and warrants further investigation. This investigation does not look
into why this would be; but it would be worthwhile pursuing this line of questioning via qualative
research to determine whether snowy weather prompts reduced trip frequency, increased driver caution,
lower traffic density or some other factor that reduces the severity of accidents.With only 5 results in the total dataset, there are insufficient elements for the partly cloudy result to be
statistically significant; however, further investigation may be warranted, as it showed overwhelmingly
the highest proportion of severe crashes.
Similarly, the lower severe crash proportion during dark/low light conditions than during daylight (light
condition code 0) was surprising. The sample sizes for the dusk, dawn, daylight and dark – streetlights
on conditions are sufficient to suggest statistical significance. Further qualative investigation will be
required to ascertain the reason for this.
There was no major difference in proportion of severe crashes for a given road condition, weather
condition or lighting condition when excluding data from crashes where speed, driver intoxication or
driver inattention.
Machine Learning Algorithms
The highest Jaccard score obtained from the full dataset MLA was 0.67, using the Decision Tree
analysis. This score, while less than optimal, shows that MLAs may have some limited use to support
the stakeholder use of MLAs. However, the data is not at the point where the MLAs can be directly
applied in the Australian context without additional information, since this data was obtained from the
US.
Note that, as additional data will need to be gathered to tune the MLAs to the Australian context, lessons
can be learned to focus the data gathering onto areas that enhance the MLA operation. Ensuring
adequate sample sizes of all datasets, and ensuring that all stakeholders contributing to that data
collection (e.g. police) have a common classification methodology will enhance the accuracy of the
resultant future MLA.
A review of the F1, Jaccard and Log Loss scores show negligible difference (<1%) between the MLAs
generated from the full cleaned data set and the MLAs generated from the dataset that had elements
expunged where speeding, intoxication or inattention were factors in the crash. It is therefore more
useful to utilize the full dataset, to maximise the available sample size.
Although the best machine learning Jaccard and F1 score has been obtained by using Decision Tree
analysis, the false negative rate (predicting a severity 1 crash when, in fact, a severity 2 crash occurred)
is higher than in the SVM analysis. Given that the different stakeholders have different needs for this
data, some users may find the SVM more appropriate, despite the lower accuracy (for example, mapping
and direction software to divert users away from areas with high severe crash potential has a different
limit of acceptability for false negatives than software that directs emergency services to stand by near
areas of high potential car accident severity).
Conclusion
The analysis of the Seattle Car Accident data suggests that weather, lighting conditions and road
conditions have a significant impact on the likelihood of a car accident being severe.
Whilst a Machine Learning Algorithm may not be able to perfectly predict which conditions are more
likely to result in severe car accidents, with the highest Jaccard score obtained of 0.67 obtained by the
Decision Tree MLA, they provide valuable directional insights into the likelihood of severe accidents
under a range of weather, lighting and road conditions. These insights may be utilized by policy makers
to direct policy to discourage drivers from driving under the conditions where a severe accident is more
likely, and mapping and driver directional software developers to direct drivers away from areas where
a severe accident is more likely.The Decision Tree MLA provided the highest accuracy, and may be of more use to policy makers,
mapping software developers and information provided to road users. However, the high false negative
rate means that the Decision Tree MLA may not be appropriate for use in emergency services
determining when to increase emergency services availability and/or divert emergency services to areas
where the MLA predicts a higher severe crash rate. Rather, the SVM model would be better utilized for
this purpose.
Valuable insights may be further gleaned from the furthering of data collection in the Australian context.
However, this data is not without its problems, due to the subjectivity of “road conditions” and “lighting
conditions”, and the fact that there is no clear indication of the magnitude of the speeding. Increasing
the context available from the data may enhance the accuracy of the MLA.
